capitulo 2:
CHAPTER TWO

The Market Place

On a summer morning about two centuries ago, the grass plot in front of the jail in Prison Lane was occupied by a large number of Bostonians. Their eyes were fixed on the old oak door. Their faces were 
grim
 and rigid.

Every time there was such a group of people in front of the jail, there was usually a whipping of a disobedient child, a lazy 
bond-servant
, a 
Quaker
 or a turbulent Indian. It could also have been the hanging of a witch.

The spectators looked very solemn and severe, as was typical of people who believed that religion and law were almost identical.

There was practically no sympathy from the crowd for the condemned individual. What we would consider a small offense today, was then punished very harshly—even with death itself.

The women in the crowd were particularly interested in what was about to happen. They were wives and 
maidens
 of English birth. Their 
features
 were hard, their expressions bitter.

“
Goodwives
,” said a severe-looking woman of fifty, “we should be the ones to judge the evil doings of this Hester Prynne, since we are women of mature age and church members of good 
repute
. What do you all think? If the 
hussy
 were judged by us five, would she receive the same sentence as the magistrates have decided on? I think not!”

“People say,” said another woman, “that the Reverend Master Dimmesdale, her pastor, is very upset that such a scandal has fallen upon his congregation.”

“The magistrates are God-fearing gentlemen, but they are too generous—that is the truth,” added a third older woman.

“At the very least, they should have put the brand of a 
hot iron
 on Hester Prynne’s forehead. Madame Hester would have 
winced
 at that, I am sure! But, little will she care what they put on her dress! She could cover it with a brooch, and then walk the streets as proud as ever!”

“But even if she covers the mark, the pain will always be in her heart,” said a soft-spoken young wife, holding a child by hand.

“Goodness!” exclaimed a man in the crowd, “Is there no virtue in a woman, except for what comes from the fear of punishment? Quiet now! The lock of the prison door is turning, and here comes Mistress Prynne herself!”

The door of the jail was thrown open, and there appeared the grim, threatening figure of the 
town-beadle
. He was like a black shadow emerging into the sunshine. He had a sword by his side and carried a 
staff of office
. His aspect represented the extreme severity of the Puritan code of law.

He stretched out the official staff in his left hand, and laid his right hand on the young woman’s shoulder, pulling her forward. Once they had reached the prison door, she pushed his hand away from her shoulder. This action marked her natural dignity and force of character. She stepped out into the open air, of her own free will. In her arms, she carried an infant of about three months.

When the young woman—the mother of the child—stood before the crowd, her first impulse was to hold the infant close to her chest, as if to hide something that was fastened to her dress.

After a moment, however, she realized that she was using her child, the living sign of her 
shame
, to hide another sign of shame. Therefore, she put the child on her arm and, with a burning 
blush
 and an arrogant smile, she looked straight at her townspeople. On the breast of her dress, in fine red cloth, surrounded with elaborate designs in gold thread, appeared the letter “A”. It was so artistically done, that it looked like a lovely decoration on her dress.

The young woman was tall, with a perfectly elegant body. She had thick, dark hair that reflected the sunshine. Her face was beautifully regular and her 
complexion
 was rich in color. She had a marked brow and deep black eyes. She was lady-like, too. She had a certain gentle dignity about her. She radiated a painful, but beautiful light.

The point which drew all eyes was the SCARLET LETTER, so fantastically embroidered, which illuminated her. It had the effect of a 
spell
, taking her out of the ordinary relations with humanity, and enclosing her in a sphere by herself.



“She is very skilled with her needle,” remarked one of the female spectators, “but only a 
brazen
 hussy could show her skill in this manner! This is her way of laughing at the magistrates, and making the punishment something to be proud of!”

“Oh, peace neighbors, peace!” whispered their youngest companion. “Don’t let her hear you!”

“Make way, make way!” cried the beadle. “Open a passage, and I promise you that every man, woman and child will be able to look at Mistress Prynne and her 
apparel
, from now until one o’clock. A blessing on the Colony of Massachusetts, where injustice and wickedness are dragged out into the sunshine! Come along, Madame Hester, and show your scarlet letter in the marketplace!”

Hester Prynne walked towards the place of her punishment. A crowd of curious schoolboys ran in front of her, turning their heads to look at her face and at the humiliating letter on her breast. It was as though her heart had been thrown out into the street for the spectators to walk on.

However, no one could see her inner agony, and she walked serenely to the 
scaffold
. The scaffold was the platform of the 
pillory
, that horrid instrument of discipline that confines the human head in its tight grip, and exposes it to the world.

Hester Prynne was not condemned to the pillory. She was condemned to stand on the scaffold, for everyone to look at. It was intolerable! The Governor, several counselors, a judge, a general and the ministers of the town were all at the balcony of the meetinghouse, looking down on the platform.



As she stood on the scaffold, vivid memories of her childhood flashed through her mind. She remembered her schooldays and her years as a young girl. These memories made her forget, for a few instants, the brutal reality of the present. She remembered her native village in England and her paternal home—a 
decayed
 house of gray stone with a poverty-stricken aspect. She saw her father’s face, and her mother’s too. She saw her own face, alive with the happiness and beauty of youth.

Then she remembered another face, the face of a man troubled by his years—the pale, thin face of a scholar, with dull eyes that had 
toiled
 over many books. Yet, those tired eyes had a strange, penetrating power to read the human soul. Hester also remembered his slight deformity: his left shoulder was a bit higher than the right.

Suddenly, Hester’s mind returned to the present, to the marketplace of the Puritan settlement, with all the townspeople looking at her, at her infant and at the scarlet letter. This was her new reality.

Capitulo 3:

CHAPTER THREE

The Recognition

As Hester was standing on the platform she saw, in the distance, an Indian who was standing next to a white man. The white man had strange clothes and was small in stature. There was remarkable intelligence in his features. Hester noticed that one of the man’s shoulders was higher than the other. When she realized that the man had a thin, 
weary
 face and a slight physical deformity, she pressed her child to her breast with such force, that the poor infant cried out.

The stranger had set his eyes on Hester. At first, he looked at her carelessly. But after a while, his look became intense and penetrating. Then, a look of horror crossed his face. He tried to control his strong emotions, and soon he appeared to be calm.

At this point, he met Hester’s eyes. She appeared to recognize him. He slowly raised his finger, and put it on his lips.

He then asked a townsman the following question. “Who is this woman and why is she on the platform?”

“You must be a stranger in this area, my friend,” answered the townsman, looking curiously at the man and his Indian companion, “otherwise you would have heard of Mistress Hester Prynne and her evil doings. She has created a scandal in Master Dimmesdale’s church.”

“Really?” said the man. “I am a stranger. I have traveled by land and sea, and I have been a prisoner of the Indians. Please tell me of this woman’s offenses.”

“That woman, sir, was the wife of a well-educated man, English by birth, who had lived in Amsterdam for a long time. One day he decided to settle in Massachusetts. Therefore, he sent his wife first, and he remained in Amsterdam to look after some business. Two years have passed, and the young woman has never received any news from her husband.”

“I understand,” replied the stranger. “And who is the father of the infant?”

“The matter is a mystery. Madame Hester refuses to speak. Our Massachusetts magistrates have been 
merciful
 with Hester Prynne. They say that she is young and 
fair
, and was strongly tempted to her fall. Moreover, it is likely that her husband may be at the bottom of the sea. If the magistrates had followed the law to its extreme, the penalty would have been death! Instead, the penalty is to stand on the platform for three hours. And then, to wear the mark of shame on her breast for the rest of her life.”

“A wise sentence,” said the stranger. “She will be a living sermon against sin until the shameful letter is 
engraved
 on her 
tombstone
. It upsets me that the partner of her shame is not standing on the platform by her side. But he will be known!—he will be known!—he will be known!”

He 
bowed
 courteously to the townsman and left the crowd with his Indian companion.

Hester stood on the scaffold, staring at the stranger. In her heart she was thankful that the crowd, dreadful in itself, was there to separate her from him—to protect her from him! She dreaded the moment when she would have to meet him alone, face to face.

Several important men of authority and religion had assembled at the meetinghouse to discuss and judge Hester Prynne’s case. These older men were, without doubt, good, wise, just and virtuous. But they were not capable of judging the good and evil in a woman’s heart.

Governor Bellingham, head of the community, was present. The famous Reverend John Wilson, the oldest clergyman in Boston, called out Hester’s name.

“Hester Prynne,” said the clergyman, “I have tried to persuade my young brother, Reverend Dimmesdale, to deal with you in discussing the 
vileness
 of your sin. Reverend Dimmesdale is your pastor and knows you better than I. Hester Prynne, you must not continue to hide the name of he who tempted you to this 
grievous
 fall.

“Reverend Dimmesdale does not agree with me. He feels that it is against the nature of a woman to force her to open the secrets of her heart to the world. Who will deal with this poor sinner’s soul?”

There was a murmur among the dignified occupants of the balcony.

Governor Bellingham spoke in an authoritative voice, “Master Dimmesdale, the responsibility of this woman’s soul is yours. You must convince her to 
repent
 and confess.”

The whole crowd looked at Reverend Dimmesdale, a young clergyman, who had come from the great English universities, bringing all his learning to the wilderness. He was eloquent and deeply religious. He had a striking aspect with large, brown, melancholy eyes, and a mouth which tended to tremble. This expressed both nervous sensibility and a great power of self-control.The young minister had a worried, almost frightened look. He was simple and childlike, but his sermons, which reflected his purity of thought, affected his listeners like the speech of an angel.

“Speak to the woman, my brother,” said Mr Wilson. “She must confess the truth!”

“Hester Prynne,” said Reverend Dimmesdale, leaning over the balcony and looking into her eyes, “you have heard what Reverend Wilson said. I ask you to confess the name of your fellow sinner. Do not have pity for him. Your silence will not save his soul. Your silence will only make him add hypocrisy to sin. It is better for him to join you on the platform than to hide a guilty heart all through his life.”

The young pastor’s voice was sweet, rich, deep and broken. He was able to evoke sympathy from the crowd.



Hester shook her head.

“Woman, do not go beyond the limits of Heaven’s mercy!” cried Reverend Wilson. “Speak out the name! That name and your repentance could help to take the scarlet letter off your breast.”

“Never!” replied Hester, looking into the deep and troubled eyes of Reverend Dimmesdale.

“Speak, woman!” said another stern voice from the crowd. “Speak and give your child a father!”

“I will not speak!” answered Hester, turning as pale as death.

“She will not speak,” murmured Reverend Dimmesdale, who was leaning over the balcony with his hand on his heart. He moved back with a long sigh. “What strength and generosity in a woman’s heart. She will not speak!”

Capitulo 4:
CHAPTER FOUR

The Encounter

After her return to prison, Hester Prynne was in a state of nervous excitement. It was impossible for her to remain calm. The infant was not feeling well either. It was crying desperately and was obviously in pain.

Master Brackett, the jailer, decided to call a 
physician
, who was staying in the prison as a guest until the magistrates could meet with the Indians to decide his 
ransom
. The physician’s name was Roger Chillingworth. The jailer accompanied him to Hester’s cell. When she saw the man that she had noticed in the crowd, she became as still as death.

The physician entered the room quietly and examined the infant carefully. He then opened his leather case and took out a medicine that he mixed with water.

“Here, woman! The child is yours—she is not mine. Make the child drink from this cup.”

Hester refused the medicine, and at the same time gazed at him with apprehension. “Would you 
avenge
 yourself on this innocent child?” she whispered.

“Foolish woman!” responded the physician. “Why should I 
harm
 this suffering child? The medicine is good and strong, and if it were my child, I would give it.”

Hester still hesitated, so he took the infant and gave it the medicine. The child stopped crying after a while, and then fell asleep.

The physician proceeded to examine the mother, and then prepared another medicine for her.

“Drink this! It is an old Indian medicine. It will calm you but it cannot give you a sinless conscience. I have no medicine for that.”

“Is there death in this cup?” Hester asked.

“Do you know me so little, Hester Prynne? If I want revenge, what better revenge than to let you live, so that your shame can always be on your bosom?” He touched the scarlet letter with his long finger.

“Live, therefore, and support your punishment in the eyes of men and women, in the eyes of your husband, in the eyes of your child.”

Hester drank the medicine and sat down on the bed where the child was sleeping. The physician sat down near the bed.

Hester knew that she had deeply and irreparably injured the man who sat next to her.

“It was my 
folly
, my weakness, to marry you,” said the physician. “I was a man in decay, having given my best years to feed my dream of knowledge. I was born with a physical deformity. Why did I ever think that my intellectual gifts could compensate for my 
misshapen
 body and my age in the eyes of a beautiful, young girl!

“From the moment when we came down the church steps together, as husband and wife, I should have known that there would be a scarlet letter at the end of our path.”

“You knew that I did not love you. I never pretended to love you. I have always been frank with you,” said Hester.

“True,” he replied. “It was my folly. In my life, the world has been a 
cheerless
 place. My heart was sad and lonely without a household fire. I was looking for a little happiness, a little warmth. And so, Hester, I took you into my heart.”

“I have greatly 
wronged
 you,” murmured Hester.

“We have wronged each other,” answered the physician. “By marrying you, I created an unnatural relation between your youth and my decay. I plan no vengeance against you, Hester. Between you and me the scale hangs fairly balanced. But who is the man who has wronged us both?”

“Do not ask me! You will never know!” replied Hester 
vehemently
.



“Never? Believe me, Hester, there are very few things hidden from the man who devotes himself to solving a mystery. All my life, I have searched for the truth in books. I will search for him and I will find him! Sooner or later, he must be mine!”

The eyes of the wrinkled scholar glowed so intensely upon her, that Hester put her hands over her heart, fearing that he might read her secret.

“You will not reveal his name, but he is mine. He does not wear a scarlet letter, but I will read it on his heart. He will be mine!”

Hester was terrified.

“You have kept the secret of your lover’s name. Now, keep my secret! No one here knows me. Do not tell a soul that I am your husband. I will 
pitch
 my tent here where I have ties—a woman, a man and a child. No matter whether my ties are of love or hate. You, Hester Prynne, belong to me. My home is where you are and where he is. But do not betray me!”

“Why not announce yourself openly and 
cast me off
?” Hester asked.

“It may be that I do not want the dishonor of being the husband of a faithless woman. It may be for other reasons. Let everyone think that I am dead. If you betray me, beware! His fame, his position, his life will be in my hands. Beware!”

“I will keep your secret, as I have kept his,” said Hester.

“Swear it!” he insisted. And she swore.

Capitulo 5:
CHAPTER FIVE

Hester and Pearl

Hester Prynne’s prison term was over. The prison door was thrown open, and she came out into the bright sunshine. For Hester’s tormented heart, the sunshine had no other purpose than to reveal the scarlet letter on her breast.

From this day on, she would be alone in the world with her shame. And each day would be the same, as her burden of shame, misery and solitude grew heavier and harder to bear. Even after her death, her grave would bear the sign of her sin, of her shame.

Hester, however, was free to leave the Puritan settlement of Boston. She was free to return to her birthplace or to any other European land, where she could begin a new life. But there is a strange fatality that attracts human beings irresistibly to the place where a great event has given color and perhaps meaning to their lives. And it seems that the more tragic the event, the greater the attraction to that place.

Her sin, her 
ignominy
, were the roots that she had planted in the soil of the Puritan settlement. Perhaps another feeling kept her there too; a feeling that she was afraid to recognize, a feeling that she hid from herself. In the Puritan settlement, there lived the man who was her partner in sin and the father of her child.

She forced herself to believe that the reason for remaining in New England was that here, she would purge her soul through humiliation, shame and suffering.

Therefore, Hester did not flee. She and her child went to live in a small thatched cottage near the seashore and far from the Puritan settlement. She lived a life of isolation. She had no friends.

Her only contact with other humans was through her work. She possessed an art that was required even in these 
barren
 lands—the art of needle work. She was exceptionally skilled with the needle.

Public ceremonies, installation of magistrates, funeral robes and baby linen all required rich embroidery and beautiful ornamentation. Hester had a good amount of work to do all year long. But never was she called to embroider the white veil of a young bride. This indicated the 
relentless
 vigor with which society punished her for her sin.

Hester often gave contributions to charity to help the poor of the community. She made clothes for them too. The poor often 
scorned
 her, but they readily accepted her charity.

Hester felt completely excluded from society. Every gesture, every word, and even the silence of those she contacted expressed that she was 
banished
.

If she entered a church on the Sabbath, she was immediately the object of gossip and scorn. Hester began to fear children for when she walked through the town they followed her, screaming insults.



Terrible legends grew around the scarlet letter. Some people believed that it was red-hot with infernal fire, and could be seen glowing at night when Hester walked outside.

Hester had named her little girl Pearl because a pearl was an object of great price. And she had paid a very high price indeed for her Pearl.

Hester knew that what she had done was evil, and she believed that its result would not be good. Therefore, she fearfully examined Pearl, expecting to discover something dark, peculiar or perverse in the child.

Pearl had no physical defect. She had an inborn grace that accompanied her 
flawless
 beauty. In this little girl, there was something both wild and majestic.

Hester made her richly decorated dresses that 
enhanced
 Pearl’s beauty. She did everything in her power to be a strict, but loving mother.

As Pearl grew, Hester could not help asking herself if she was a human child. Her shiny black eyes had a look that was very intelligent, yet inexplicable, perverse and sometimes malicious. She was an enigma for her mother. For the townspeople, Pearl was a demon 
offspring
—a living sin!

The first thing Pearl noticed in her life was the scarlet letter on Hester’s breast. She would grab it with her little hand and then she would look into her mother’s eyes with a peculiar smile. This peculiar smile puzzled and frightened Hester.

Pearl was an 
outcast
 in the children’s world. She was considered a product of sin, an evil child that had no right to be with the other children of the Puritan community of Boston. 

Capitulo 6:
CHAPTER SIX

The Governor's Hall

One day, Hester went to Governor Bellingham’s mansion to return a pair of gloves that he had given her to embroider. She had decided to return the embroidered gloves, and talk to him regarding certain gossip that she had recently heard. The townspeople had been saying that Governor Bellingham and other leading citizens wanted to take Pearl away from her mother since she was considered a lowly sinner, and could not possibly raise her child in a Christian way. If the child was really capable of moral and religious growth, and possessed the elements of salvation, then she would be better off away from her mother. Hester, therefore, was determined to talk to the governor and convince him to let her keep Pearl.

For this occasion, Pearl was wearing a 
crimson
 velvet dress, abundantly embroidered with gold thread. Pearl possessed a rich and luxuriant beauty. There was a fire in her; she seemed the 
unpremeditated offshoot
 of a passionate moment.

The child’s appearance was an inevitable reminder of what Hester was condemned to wear on her bosom. Pearl was the scarlet letter in another form—the living scarlet letter!

They reached the governor’s mansion and a bond-servant opened the door.

“Is Governor Bellingham in?” inquired Hester.

“Yes, he is,” replied the bond-servant, staring with wide-open eyes at the scarlet letter. “But he is talking to a minister and to other gentlemen. You cannot see him now.”

“I will enter anyway,” answered Hester.

The mother and little Pearl were admitted into the entrance hall. The governor was returning from a walk in his garden with Mr Wilson.

Behind the governor and Mr Wilson came two other guests: the young Reverend Arthur Dimmesdale and old Roger Chillingworth. Chillingworth had settled in the town about three years ago, and worked as a physician. He was a friend of the young minister, whose health had been suffering lately.

As the governor entered the hall, he immediately noticed the little scarlet figure before him. “How did this guest enter my hall?” he asked.

“Indeed,” cried Mr Wilson, “who is this little scarlet bird? Who are you and why has your mother dressed you in this strange way?”

“I am mother’s child,” answered the scarlet vision, “and my name is Pearl.”

Governor Bellingham looked sternly at Hester and said, “Hester Prynne, we have been worried about your child’s salvation. Is it right for you, who has fallen into sin, to be responsible for the religious and moral instruction of your child? This child needs to be dressed soberly, disciplined strictly and instructed in the truths of heaven and earth. What can you do for her?”

“I can teach my little Pearl what I have learned from this!” answered Hester, laying her finger on the scarlet letter.

“Woman, it is because of this 
badge
 of shame that we want to give the child to other hands.”

“Nevertheless,” said the mother calmly, “this badge has taught me, and is teaching me at this moment, lessons that can make my child wiser and better.”

“We will judge carefully,” said Governor Bellingham. “Reverend Wilson, examine Pearl and see whether she has had the Christian instruction for a child of her age.”

The old minister sat down and tried to 
draw
 Pearl near him.

“Pearl,” he said solemnly, “can you tell me who made you?” Now Pearl knew very well who made her because Hester had talked to her about the Heavenly Father. For a child of three years old, she knew many things concerning catechism. But she refused to answer Reverend Wilson’s question. After putting her finger in her mouth and refusing to speak, she finally said that she had not been made at all—she had been picked off a bush of wild roses by her mother!



Old Roger Chillingworth smiled and whispered something in the young minister’s ear. Hester looked at Chillingworth and saw how much uglier he had become. 

“This is awful!” cried the governor. “Here is a child of three years old who does not know who made her! We do not need to discuss the matter any further.”

Hester picked up Pearl and held the child tightly in her arms. “God gave me this child! She is my only happiness. She keeps me alive! You will not take her! I will die first!”

“My poor woman, the child will be well cared for!”

“God gave her to me,” repeated Hester raising her voice. “I will not give her up.” She suddenly turned to Mr Dimmesdale and said, “Speak for me! You are my pastor and are responsible for my soul! You know me better than these men. You know what is in my heart. Speak for me!”

Reverend Dimmesdale looked thinner and more troubled than when he had questioned Hester three years earlier.

“There is truth in what she says,” began the minister with a sweet, tremulous, but powerful voice. “God gave her the child and the instinctive knowledge of its nature and needs, which no other mortal can possess. Moreover, there is a quality of 
sacredness
 in the relation between this mother and child.”

“How is that, Master Dimmesdale?” interrupted the governor.

“This child has come from the hand of God to work in many ways upon the mother’s heart. It was meant to be a blessing; the one blessing in her life! This child was meant to keep her mother’s soul alive, and to preserve her from blacker depths of sin. Therefore, it is good for this poor, sinful woman to care for the child. The child will remind her of her fall. Let us follow God’s wish.”

“You speak with a strange 
earnestness
,” said old Roger Chillingworth, smiling at him.

“My young brother has spoken well,” said Reverend Wilson. “Indeed, he has,” answered the governor. “We will leave the matter as it now stands. The child, however, must be examined in catechism, either by Reverend Wilson or Master Dimmesdale.

And at the right time, she must go to school and to 
meeting
.” After having spoken, the young minister stood by the window and looked out. Pearl, that wild little 
elf
, went to him, took his hand in both of hers and put it against her cheek. The minister looked down, laid his hand on the child’s head and then kissed her forehead.

“A strange child!” said old Roger Chillingworth. “It’s easy to see the mother’s part in her. Would it be so difficult to analyze the child’s nature and then try to guess who the father is?”

“No, it would be sinful,” said Reverend Wilson. “It is better to leave the mystery as we find it, unless Providence reveals it to us.”

Everything was satisfactorily concluded, and Hester and Pearl left the governor’s mansion. As they went down the steps, they met Mistress Hibbins, the governor’s bad-tempered sister, who was later 
executed
 as a witch.

She looked at Hester and asked, “Will you go to the forest with us tonight? I promised the 
Black Man
 that you would come.”

“I must stay at home to look after Pearl. If they had taken her away from me, I would have gone with you willingly, and I would have signed my name in the Black Man’s book with my own blood.”





Extension Chapter 2:
Thomas Cranmer (1545) by Gerlach Flicke.
The Puritans
the Origins

Puritanism was a Protestant religious reform movement. It developed within the Church of England during the late 16th century. The Puritan movement found its origins in the writings and thinking of early religious reformers such as Thomas Cranmer, and was heavily influenced by the Protestant theologian, John Calvin whose real name was Jean Chauvin. His religious movement within Puritanism was called Calvinism. In Scotland the Calvinists became known as Presbyterians. In France they were called Huguenots.

The Puritans wanted to 
purify
 the church of any remaining Roman Catholic influence. They rejected the authority of the Roman Catholic Pope and relied on the Bible as a source of religious truth. They believed in predestination: a person was either predestined by God for eternal salvation or to eternal damnation.

Their religious beliefs influenced every aspect of their daily life: social, political and economic. They observed austere morality, dress and behavior. They cultivated family piety, 
thrift
, honesty, business enterprise, education and science.

In England they were often persecuted and they strongly desired to go to the New World where they could finally practice their religion freely, and create a settlement completely governed by Puritan ideas and laws.

In 1629 a group of Puritans and merchants convinced King Charles I of England to grant their newly formed Massachusetts Bay Company an area north of the Plymouth Colony for settlement. Initially, the company was considered a business venture, but the Puritan leader, John Winthrop, decided to use the colony as a refuge for persecuted Puritans.

In March 1630, Governor John Winthrop led 700 Puritans to the New World. He was on board the vessel Arbella followed by six other ships. The Puritans arrived in Massachusetts Bay and landed in what is now Salem. Shortly after, Governor Winthrop founded Boston, which became a prosperous seaport and the capital city. 

 The landing of the Pilgrims on Plymouth Rock (c. 1846) by Sarony & Major.

After the persecution suffered in England, they were now able to practice their 
stern
 religion freely and they began to persecute their own dissenters. Those who were not good members of the church were persecuted, punished and banished. If a person was accused of being a witch or a heretic, he or she was burned at the stake or hanged. Blasphemy was punished very severely: the guilty person’s ears were cut off!

Success in the work world was seen as a sign of God’s favor, and one’s predestination to salvation. In fact, shortly after their arrival, the Puritans established a flourishing fish, fur and 
lumber
 trade with many countries. Devotion to hard work and business enterprise is at the basis of the Puritan philosophy. Accumulation of wealth is not considered sinful, as long as it doesn’t lead to an idle, dissolute life.

The work ethic, which is at the root of modern American society, derives from the Calvinists (Puritans). It has strongly influenced Americans from the time of the colonies to the present, even those who are not Calvinists. The work ethic has become a sort of all-encompassing American national 
credo.

Extension Chapter 4:
Religion in America

Nearly every religion in the world is represented in the United States, although Christianity predominates. All religions are protected in their worship by the Bill of Rights and by a long tradition of separation of Church and State. The U.S. Constitution forbids the establishment of a national religion. Today approximately 40% of the nation’s population attends religious services on a weekly basis.

Among the first white men in America were Spanish Roman Catholic missionaries who, beginning in the early 16th century, went to the southwest to convert Indians to Christianity.

The Puritans who settled New England in the early 17th century had left England to practice their strict religion freely. Roger Williams, a Salem minister, was banished from the Massachusetts Bay Colony because of a difference of opinion with his fellow Puritans. He founded Rhode Island in 1636, and it became the first American colony to allow religious freedom.

The Church of England was firmly established in Virginia after 1619. The southeast states attracted several Protestant religions: Methodists, Baptists, Presbyterians and Huguenots.

Maryland was founded as a refuge for English Catholics. New York and New Jersey were centers of the Dutch Reformed Church. In 1654, twenty-three Portuguese Jews settled in New York. Four years later, a community of Jews arrived in Rhode Island.

The Quakers, or Society of Friends, was another religious group, inspired by the Protestant Reformation. The Quakers believed that the purpose of life was to worship God and to suffer voluntarily.

 American Methodists proceeding to their camp meeting (c. 1819) by Jaques Gérard Milbert.

They believed that they could approach God directly, without the clergy. This belief and their stern lifestyle made them very unpopular. They were persecuted in England and in the New World. The Quakers were finally able to live freely in Pennsylvania which welcomed other radical Christian groups, particularly from Germany. These included the Amish, Mennonites, Dunkards and Moravians.

Today about 70,000 Amish practice their religion in about 50 communities in the United States and Canada. They live as simply as possible, avoiding all modern conveniences such as electricity and automobiles. They speak Amish among themselves and dress like they did long ago.

After 1831, there was the rise of the Mormon religion. Their beliefs and practices set them apart (for example, they practice polygamy) and they were driven away from Ohio, Missouri and Illinois. Finally, they settled in Utah, which today is a predominantly Mormon state. Other religions that are active in America are the Eastern Orthodox, Jehovah’s Witnesses, Seventh-Day Adventists, Moslems, Hindus and Buddhists. There are also numerous sects, which seem to 
spring up
 frequently.

 Temple Square, Salt Lake City (c. 1899) by William Henry Jackson.

Great progress has been made towards religious freedom in the United States over the past four hundred years.

Extension Chapter 5:
The Occult and Witchcraft

People have always been fascinated by the occult: beliefs about a mysterious “other world”, hidden forces around them, secret sources of knowledge, and latent powers within themselves. Some individuals feel they have supernatural powers or occult powers that they can use to contact the “other world”, to make good or bad things happen, to cast spells, or to predict future events.

Occult 
lore
 is less concerned with explaining events than with trying to predict, stop or induce them. Linked to this lore is the belief in life after death, and in spirits and ghosts.

 De Proprietatibus rerum (15th century) by Barthélemy l’Anglais, depicting the Zodiac.

The ancient Babylonians and Egyptians were great believers in the occult. Astrology originated in Babylonia about three thousand years ago. The Babylonians believed that they could predict the future by interpreting the positions of the sun, moon and planets.

The ancient Egyptians and Greeks also studied the heavenly bodies. They drew maps of the sky showing named constellations. The Greek zodiac is the one we still use today.

Pagan cults based on occult rituals survived the growth of such major religions as Christianity. But after the 14th century, occult practices began to be condemned by the Church as evil or satanic. There was growing persecution of sects that believed that the material world was created by the devil. People accused of devil worship or Satanic rites were persecuted, tortured and burned at the stake. This was the beginning of the witch hunts which took place throughout Europe and America until the 18th century.

It was believed that witches were in contact with the devil and other evil spirits. This gave them magic powers to cast spells and curses on people, and to make bad things happen.

Prayers, rituals and talismans were used to 
ward off
 evil spirits and bad luck. Some folk superstitions remain today, such as touching wood, or carrying a good luck charm.

Exorcism is still used today to “drive the devil out” of a person who is said to be possessed by Satan.

Prophecy, fortune-telling, palmistry, astrology and tarot cards are just some of the things that are still present in our modern society.

All over the world today, there are people who believe in magic and the occult and who perform Satanic rites. Witchcraft is often called “black magic”.

Witchcraft will probably never die because it satisfies the need of some people to predict, influence or control the mysteries of life.

Extension Chapter 6:
Salem and Witchcraft

Belief in witches and witchcraft was common in Europe and New England during the 17th century. Before the dramatic Salem witchcraft trials, almost 300 New Englanders (mostly lower-class, middle-aged women, 
spinsters
 or widows) had been accused of witchcraft, and more than 30 had been hanged. However, the Salem trials exceeded all precedents in their intensity.

In 1692, a few adolescent girls became entranced listeners of voodoo stories told by Tituba, a slave from the West Indies. Suddenly, these girls began acting strangely—they shouted, barked, 
groveled
, 
twitched
—without any apparent reason. The town doctor concluded that they had been 
bewitched
. The girls pointed to Tituba and two white women as the 
culprits
.

 Examination of a witch (1855) by Thomas H. Matteson.

The townspeople were seized by panic as the word spread that the devil was among them. At a hearing before the magistrates, the “bewitched” girls shrieked and rolled on the floor in convulsive fits as they were questioned by the magistrates. In the midst of this hysteria, Tituba shocked her listeners by confessing to the charge and accusing many others in the community of performing the devil’s work.

At this point, the crazed girls began accusing dozens of townspeople, including several of the most respected members of the Puritan community.

After a few months, the Salem prison was filled with townspeople—men, women and children—all accused of practicing witchcraft.

There was general hysteria everywhere in the area.

Within ten months, 19 people had been hanged and more than 100 had been put in prison. One man, Giles Corey, was pressed to death with heavy stones. Sarah Good, who was hanged on July 19, 1692, put a curse on Reverend Noyes. She told him that if she was hanged, he would have blood to drink. Tradition says that twenty-five years later, Reverend Noyes died of a throat hemorrhage.

As the accusations spread beyond Salem, colonial leaders began to worry that the witch-hunts were out of control. When the bewitched girls accused Samuel Willard, the devoted pastor of Boston’s First Church and president of Harvard College, the magistrates decided that something was wrong.

 Witch Hill (The Salem Martyr) 1869 by Thomas Satterwhite Noble (1835-1907).

The governor himself intervened when his own wife was accused of worshipping the devil. He 
disbanded
 the special court that was responsible for the witch-hunt and released the remaining suspects. A year after it had started, the terrible witch-hunt was finally over.

There was never another witch-hunt like it in the New England colonies. In Europe, however, witches were still being executed in the 18th century.

Arthur Miller, the famous American playwright, wrote a play about the Salem witch trials, called The Crucible. A film, based on the play, was produced in 1996.



